## 6. Considerations for an Afghan Model of Blockchain Land Registration 
The reason that blockchain technology is appealing for land registration in Afghanistan is that this system can provide a much needed source of reliability and confidence.  This has been missing and is needed to establish trust between the government and the people.  This discussion of an Afghan model for employing blockchain technology to facilitate land registration will look at three main areas; the organizational considerations for adoption, infrastructure requirements, and the technical competence required to effectively employ this technology.  This is only intended as an initial start for framing what would be required to implement this technology, the single most important consideration for using new technology is a dialog with the people who will be employing it; user requirements should drive the process.  That said a system that is free from corruption and can be relied on for it’s integrity should have a universal appeal.  

### Adoption
As noted in the UNRISD study1 in their discussion of “solutionism”, the best intentions do not always bring good results; if an idea or concept is not fully embraced by the local people adoption will be problematic.  Blockchain technology has the potential to provide transparency and integrity to systems of local governance, but it is essential that the Afghan officials embrace the decision to move forward with these tools.  With that in mind it is essential that a model is developed with local Afghan government officials taking ownership of the process. 

As stated initially in this paper it is my position that in post-conflict Afghanistan, any new tools and technology should reinforce and strengthen the existing system of government with as few changes as possible, as opposed to injecting elements of further change.  Traditionally Afghanistan has a highly centralized system of government, where permission from national level offices is required for most local actions2.  This tradition of centralization can be traced to the past monarchy and the perceived requirements to maintain sovereignty.  Previously the realities of distance and poor communication meant that there was still a high degree of local autonomy in spite of the officially centralized system.3  Today with improvements in communication the conflict between the central authority and local action is felt more strongly.  The Afghan people will have to find their own balance in terms of what roles and functions the national government is willing to cede to local action in the interest of facilitating economic activity.  What is certain is that this discussion of local versus national roles will be more equitable and effective if there is reliable, shared information about what is actually taking place in the nation.  This is a requirement that is well suited to the distributed ledger functions of blockchain technology; by having a secure transparent mechanism to represent the reality on the ground roles, authorities, and resources will be able to be addressed more effectively from shared information. 

Since Afghanistan is still in a state of active conflict in much of the country transparency and the integrity of the system of government deserve a high priority.  Trust will only be established if all stakeholders can have confidence in the same set of facts.  Due to the sensitive nature of government functions it is likely that a private, permissioned blockchain is best suited to Afghan land registration.  This would be a closed system where only designated individuals, such as government officials, were able to make entries onto the blockchain. It would be a decision for the Afghan government how much visibility into this system they were willing to tolerate, the technology supports a range of options; from a great deal of transparency as in Estonia to the more restricted access employed by banks, the nature of the blockchain employed can be designed to fit the circumstances.  It is my opinion that greater visibility will foster greater confidence, but this is a decision for the Afghans. 

A permissioned blockchain has the advantage of ensuring that economic transactions only take place within a prescribed scope of activity permitted by the government, such as limiting the amount of land that can be sold to foreign interests. Some thought would have to be given to how landowners could best access secondary capital markets from a closed system.  It is possible to enable an Afghan blockchain to make a limited set of information available to a public blockchain such as Ethereum in order to facilitate Afghan economic activity.  The degree and nature permitted without government oversight are again decisions for the Afghan government.4

It is possible to envision a system where the Afghan government registers landownership on a blockchain through a system of multiple signature contracts, where each entry that recognizes ownership requires an entry by the landowner (possibly new and old if reflecting a sale), the District Official responsible, the Provincial Official responsible, and the National Official responsible for land registration, all performed digitally.  Because all of these entries would be made on the same distributed ledger, information would be synchronized across great distances and could be reconciled within hours (or less) instead of days or weeks.  Based on what I saw of landownership in 2010 and the USIP report from 2015, a space for a narrative surrounding how the property came into possession would be a helpful of part of the official record; there have been so many sequential authorities responsible for governance of the land over the last 30 years that a narrative would provide a helpful component for resolving future contested claims.  Space for the endorsement of neighbors in the official record would further establish legitimacy.  With time the blockchain record would establish legitimacy as government authority is more firmly established.  However what items are recorded (narratives, tribal affiliations or authority, etc.) are all items that will have to be established by the Afghan people.  The Annex to this paper identifies a possible set of initial issues to begin planning. 

In the past each level of the District, Provincial, and National system was an invitation for corruption, where officials could charge a personal fee for performing their duties.  This sort of corruption will be more difficult if the process of land registration is conducted using a transparent decentralized system, oversight is built in; there is no need for a landowner to ever meet the Provincial or National Officials involved in approving the process if the database, the distributed ledger, is always accessible simultaneously from any member location.  This removes potential points of contact between Afghan citizens and officials seeking to profit from their positions.  Further there is visibility over the entire conduct of the process, backlogs are immediately apparent which forces all officers in the government to perform their tasks of approval in a responsible manner.  Finally having an indisputable record of landownership forces a recognition of land usage; government authorities could compare what is registered with what agricultural activity is taking place, as observed physically.  The potential accountability for crop harvests should be able to lead to a reduction in opium production, as well as an objective system of taxation.

Effective registration permits the landowners to manage their economic activity with the layer of abstraction described by Hernando de Soto as necessary in the modern world economy; by being able to establish a record of ownership and crop harvest farmers can obtain credit, insurance, or enter into futures contracts.  All of these economic actions require an effective system of information management.  This is only possible if the Afghan people identify this as a priority, but blockchain technology can accomplish all of these functions. 

### Infrastructure
Because the blockchain is a protocol that runs on the conventional internet the minimum physical infrastructure requirement for implementing blockchain land registration in Afghanistan is internet access at the local government level. This is not an insurmountable obstacle, even at the remote District level.  Ghana’s land registration project with BitLand has demonstrated that the use of solar powered systems make it possible to perform these accesses in remote or austere locations. 

Internet access is the minimum, but should only be seen as a starting point; by having land registration in a publicly available form the ability of citizens to interact with the value of their holdings becomes more accessible, precisely as Hernando de Soto described.  As stated previously, the nature and extent of transactions permitted will be a decision that the government of Afghanistan has to make. 

There are projects under development to enable blockchain access over the smartphone.5  Smartphones represent still greater control of ownership.  Incorporating a fungible cryptocurrency associated with land value is a further abstraction to liberalize the local economy (translating land value into BitCoin or Ether for example).  Bitland and Ghana’s use of Cadastrals as a local economic unit separate from the underlying blockchain architecture is an example of this currency level abstraction.6 Due to the current state of the economy of Afghanistan these goals should be viewed as part of a future evolution; having the essential record of land registration facilitates these objectives, but does so by providing utility short of these more ambitious targets. 
 
### Technical competence
The blockchain land registration in progress in The Republic of Georgia and Ghana are both being approached through a government partnership with private entities.  This is necessary in the near term since the technology is esoteric and evolving quickly.  The technical expertise required by Afghan officials will be driven by the functions that will be performed in the various locations.  This is an educational requirement and the investment in Afghan officials should be seen as a component of any future system. 

Human capital is the critical shortfall in Afghanistan, in terms of integrating into the modern world economy.  Basic literacy requirements were waived for Afghan Police in Helmand in 2010 simply because there were not enough literate candidates.  The USIP report on land registration reflected similar challenges.7

However the hurdles of literacy and technical competence are not insurmountable; currently in Herat and Kabul there are at least two organizations devoted to training Afghan girls as software engineers, and both specifically mention employing BitCoin technology.8  This is an obvious starting point to find Afghans to support a system of blockchain registration.  Working in partnership with an organization that focused on a role for women would have the added advantage of increasing the contribution of Afghan women in what could become a vital tool for Afghan citizens to enter the larger world economy.  Anything that strengthens the position of Afghan women in their society has to be seen as exponentially more valuable. 

## 7. Challenges and Future Research 
	Afghanistan’s land law with regards to the relation of the state, the people, and the land is in need of reform.  First and foremost this is a question of will on the part of the Afghan leadership.  An unwillingness to reform the law is likely a reflection of the weak position of the government; reforming such significant legislation will require extensive negotiation among lawmakers.  At this stage it is likely few feel they hold the political capital to extend themselves into such a contentious issue.  Blockchain technology can contribute an element integrity and stability within the land registration process, but initiating the process of reform is entirely dependent on Afghan leadership. 

As mentioned, employing blockchain technology to facilitate land registration and improve governance requires a degree of stability in terms of security.  The use of the blockchain’s distributed ledger functions will improve the effectiveness, efficiency and integrity of government actions, but all government functions are still subject to the realities of violence; in order for government to establish the rule of law the state must command the monopoly on violence. The insights provided into government action, in terms of the integrity, transparency and accountability of functions performed, should facilitate reconciliation, but buy-in is a necessary requirement. 

	Perhaps a greater obstacle to adoption of blockchain technology to perform these functions is an adequate vision from government officials that will be required to embrace the new technology.   The distinction between a natural skepticism of something new and largely unproven will be a complicating factor that hides officials who do not want greater accountability over their actions.  Again, education and effective communication are key. 

	Any future project at registering land on the blockchain will have to consider how to measure the effectiveness of the overall effort.  Acreage registered, and claims issued are obvious metrics, but the nature of the blockchain should also measure the expectation of expanding economic access into secondary markets and the utility of providing an abstraction to manage land value.

This technology is still in it’s infancy; the original concept paper that started this iteration of blockchain development is less than 10 years old, and the most promising applications were only initiated in 2014.  But this technology has been embraced and a great variety of problems are being addressed with tools designed to establish trust between disparate parties. 
	
## 8. Conclusion
The range of countries that are embracing blockchain technology continues to grow; the Russian Bank of Russia has established a “Masterchain” off of the Ethereum blockchain for inter-bank transfers,9 Russia has additionally established a consortium to harmonize financial blockchain employment and development,10 Chinese insurance companies have begun incorporating blockchain technology into operations,11 in 2015 Dubai began a government initiative with the goal of establishing a digital infrastructure similar to that of Estonia,12 and German banks have begun studying blockchain’s financial potential as well.13  The World Economic Forum estimated that the value of goods managed on blockchain systems will just continue to grow in the near future, with an estimate of 80% of the banks that they surveyed predicted to initiate blockchain projects in 2017.14  What all of these countries share is a vision of what is possible through technology; that the ability to employ strong encryption in a wider range of interactions will collapse the distance between parties and permit greater confidence in these interactions. 

If Afghanistan can begin the process of land registration on a blockchain it will facilitate greater economic integration in the future and help combat the debilitating tradition of predatory governance.  Blockchain technology can contribute integrity and accountability to local governance and protect the rights of the people.  Employing this technology will have to be part of a larger legal reform of the official orientation towards land ownership.  What the technology can contribute is a means of ensuring that the agreement between the state and the people is protected. 

Establishing trust and confidence in basic governance within the country is the only way that Afghanistan can transition from aid recipient to economic partner.  The Economist magazine called the blockchain “the Trust Machine” due to the way the distributed ledger cannot be altered.15  In Afghanistan trust is a scarce commodity.  Incorporating the blockchain for land registration to foster greater transparency, integrity, and accountability could become a key component of improving basic governance in Afghanistan. 
Additionally establishing land ownership in an irrefutable form would have all of the benefits cited by Hernando de Soto at the beginning of this paper; ownership provides the layer of abstraction required for citizens to participate in the modern world economy.  Without a guarantee of these rights landholders are not owners and their personal power is always subject to pressures out of their control. 

The technical requirements for Afghanistan to join this economic future are not as significant as the political ones.  Without some measure of stability the mechanisms of effective government will not survive.  Blockchain technology can be an essential tool to reinforce stability, but it can not overcome the realities of violence.  It can however offer a measure of assurance and trust that has not been possible up until now, providing an incentive to fully participate in the social contact.  The transparency and the confidence in government actions that are provided by blockchain technology should inspire greater cooperation and act as a foundation for a more stable, more productive role in the world economy.  Once conditions are met the Afghan people should be prepared to harness this fast moving technology.  That will require the imagination to believe that a better future is possible, something Afghanistan has been repeatedly denied. 

