## 1. Introduction
This paper seeks to examine the use of blockchain technology as a trust building mechanism in post conflict Afghanistan by exploring the blockchain’s potential role in facilitating transparent land registration in a manner that enhances the integrity of the state.  Peace building and reconciling formerly hostile parties is always a fragile process, and Afghanistan has repeatedly slid back into war just as it appeared stability was returning.  Trust in new institutions can present an obstacle to establishing the larger trust required to cease violence--especially if there is a tradition of predatory governance in the area.  Blockchain technology suggests a model where trust in institutions could be improved by enhancing the transparency, accountability, and integrity of institutions, government officials, and official actions.  This increased confidence by the people in the state opens the possibility for additional services being made available to citizens and greater integration with legitimate external economies.  In 2016 we have seen the refinement of blockchain technology to the point where it suggests a model of how the blockchains’s distributed ledger could be used to foster trust, fight corruption, strengthen new institutions, and facilitate the integration of the post conflict area into the world economy.  This paper will discuss this objective and some of the issues surrounding implementation. 

## 2. Problem Statement
### Trek Nawa Case study
In 2009-10 I was a Marine serving as an advisor to the Afghan Police in Helmand Province Afghanistan.  I had served previously as a Police Adviser in Iraq and this was my second tour in Afghanistan.  Working with police forces brings you in contact with citizens as they interact with the government at it’s most fundamental level.  This experience highlighted some key concepts surrounding governance, rule of law, property, and basic requirements for a stable society.
  
One of the more interesting people that I worked with in 2009-10 was a tribal elder named Hakim Khan.  He was the senior patriarch of his tribe and represented the most pure example of traditional Pashtun tribal authority that I saw in my two tours in Afghanistan.  “Khan” is a traditional honorific (in addition to being an adopted name) and historically signified “he who feeds the people”.<a title="There are no Khans anymore: Economic Development and Social Change in Tribal Afghanistan" href="https://github.com/Cameron-Grams/Glass-Shield/blob/master/Part_4/Footnotes/Footnotes.md" ><sup>1</sup></a>  The Khan was the traditional decision making authority for questions of resource allocation.  It was claimed that in the 1970s the nature of this role changed with the monetization of Afghan culture, and that the authority of Khans decreased. <a title=" There are no Khans anymore: Economic Development and Social Change in Tribal Afghanistan  " href="https://github.com/Cameron-Grams/Glass-Shield/blob/master/Part_4/Footnotes/Footnotes.md"><sup>2</sup></a>  In 2010 in Helmand province Hakim Khan’s authority was still very real; in addition to being a tribal elder Hakim Khan was a colonel in the Afghan Police.  Unquestionably monetization of the economy had changed the traditional tribal roles, but I would contend that the extended period of conflict in Afghanistan reinforced tribal authority in ways that are still not entirely clear with regards to the modern nation.

Afghan culture in Helmand province is still heavily tribal.  Formal government as recognized internationally sits on top of other arrangements that are more decisive in the citizens daily lives.  The periods of greatest stability in the past 30 thirty years were ones where the central government recognized a role for tribal leadership and permitted a degree of autonomy for tribal decisions and actions.<a title=" Afghanistan: A Cultural and Political History  " href="https://github.com/Cameron-Grams/Glass-Shield/blob/master/Part_4/Footnotes/Footnotes.md"><sup>3</sup></a>  Tribal dynamics continue to shape Afghanistan today and directly impact government legitimacy.  One strong undercurrent of the conflict with the Taliban has been the competition between Durrani and Ghilzai Pashtun tribes and their struggle for power.<a title=" Afghanistan: A Cultural and Political History  " href="https://github.com/Cameron-Grams/Glass-Shield/blob/master/Part_4/Footnotes/Footnotes.md"><sup>4</sup></a> This conflict can be traced to the 1800s and pre-dates both Soviet and US involvement in Afghanistan.  In Helmand in 2010 a reliable predictor of anti-government activity was the sentiment of senior members of the Ishaqzai tribe (a Ghilzai subtribe aligned with the Taliban).  Access to land, water, other resources, and loyalty were all filtered through tribal power arrangements.

Hakim Khan was very much the tether for his tribe to the Afghan government.  Many members of this tribe occupied an area called Trek Nawa to the west of the provincial capital of Lashkar Gah.  General Ayub, the Personnel Officer of the Afghan Provincial Police force, stated that this tribe was illegally occupying government land.<a title="  Personal conversations with Gen Ayub in 2009-10.  " href="https://github.com/Cameron-Grams/Glass-Shield/blob/master/Part_4/Footnotes/Footnotes.md"><sup>5</sup></a>  It was only due to Hakim Khan’s influence that they were able to maintain their presence unmolested.  Hakim Khan was at the apex of the relationship with the government; he was the point of articulation for his tribe into the modern Afghan economy.  Hakim Khan protected the members of his tribe from pressure, both from the government officials responsible for security in the province and other tribes seeking access to arable land.

The issues that I witnessed in 2010 continue unchanged; in June of 2015 the United States Institute for Peace (USIP) released a report summarizing a two year project they conducted attempting to strengthen formal land registration in Afghanistan and develop objective procedures for dispute resolution.<a title="Land Conflict in Afghanistan. USIP Special Report 372 (2015) " href="https://github.com/Cameron-Grams/Glass-Shield/blob/master/Part_4/Footnotes/Footnotes.md"><sup>6</sup></a> In their report they state that possibly only 20% of the land in use in Afghanistan has a formal title for registration.  The project identified many structural problems that originate from current Afghan land law, specifically that if citizens do not have formal registration for their land they can not obtain formal recognition of ownership, USIP explicitly called this a Catch-22.  The most dangerous part of this law is the proviso that any land without formal title defaults to being considered government land.  The default position has the potential to deliberately disenfranchise 80% of landholders if USIP’s estimate is accurate.  Additionally the law favors the state of affairs in 1978  and defaults to land registration efforts from the 1960-70s that compiled an initial Basic Book of land registration, before the Russian invasion.<a title="Land Conflict in Afghanistan. USIP Special Report 372 (2015)" href="https://github.com/Cameron-Grams/Glass-Shield/blob/master/Part_4/Footnotes/Footnotes.md"><sup>7</sup></a>  This policy does not account for either the impact of forced migration due to the prolonged conflict or the reality of communal tribal ownership or other tribal dynamics such as the conditions exemplified by Hakim Khan and his people. The USIP report explicitly states; “The basic issue _(...with the inefficiency of the law...)_ is that the law is so narrowly written that, in most cases, the state is a threat rather than a protector of rights”.<a title="Land Conflict in Afghanistan. USIP Special Report 372 (2015)" href="https://github.com/Cameron-Grams/Glass-Shield/blob/master/Part_4/Footnotes/Footnotes.md"><sup>8</sup></a>   This rigid approach undermines the legitimacy of the state, establishes conditions conducive to predatory local officials, and prevents citizens from enjoying the full benefits of their labor in a modern economy.

### Land rights in less governed regions
The problems faced in rural Afghanistan are not unique.  Hernando de Soto’s body of work documents how much of the world is disconnected from the international economic system due to a lack of formal rights to their land.<a title=" The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere Else." href="https://github.com/Cameron-Grams/Glass-Shield/blob/master/Part_4/Footnotes/Footnotes.md"><sup>9</sup></a>  This was the situation in Helmand in 2010; tribal relations largely defined the access to land and roles within society, the power dynamics that determined what was and was not possible for individual Afghans were largely out of their hands.  Without the protection of tribal elders individual farmers were left to fend for themselves against the rule of force.  This inability of the individual to access the full potential of his efforts, what should be available through modern economic innovation, is the topic of de Soto’s “The Mystery of Capital” and his current work with the Institute for Liberty and Democracy.<a title="Institute for Liberty and Democracy" href="http://www.ild.org.pe/"><sup>10</sup></a>
Hernando de Soto identifies what he defines as “dead capital” to be the possessions of poor people throughout the world that are inadequately documented and therefore not able to be realized for their potential as capital.  He states: “Because the rights to these possessions are not adequately documented, these assets cannot readily be turned into capital, cannot be traded outside of narrow local circles where people know and trust each other, cannot be used as collateral for a loan, and cannot be used as a share against an investment.”<a title="The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere Else." href="https://github.com/Cameron-Grams/Glass-Shield/blob/master/Part_4/Footnotes/Footnotes.md"><sup>11</sup></a>  This situation perfectly captures the local nature of the economy in rural Afghanistan.

De Soto goes on to outline key features of documenting ownership that underpin the modern economy:<a title="The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere Else." href="https://github.com/Cameron-Grams/Glass-Shield/blob/master/Part_4/Footnotes/Footnotes.md"><sup>12</sup></a>

* Fixing the economic potential of assets
* Integrating dispersed information about assets
* Establishing accountability for ownership
* Deriving monetary value from assets
* Networking people into a larger economic system
* Protecting transactions

All of these functions can be ascribed to developing a trusted abstraction, such as a land title proving ownership, that can be managed in a larger economic system.  The key feature for developing this representation is trust in the system of representation.  Much like currency, the underlying system that holds this representation of value must be trusted.  Traditionally that role has been provided by the stability of the state, through government officials performing various functions in the overall process of the integration of assets into the overall economy.  Afghanistan has suffered from a lack of legitimacy in the government due to both corruption and competing models for governance.  Blockchain technology provides an alternative to state authority to provide trust in the representation of value; by harnessing a strong cryptographic system that ensures stability the representations of value, land titles for example, are ensured by the system itself.  The stability and integrity of this system grows with additional users.  This impedes the ability of any single local official to perform his duties in a corrupt manner.  If used as a tool for integrating currently dispossessed individuals blockchain technology can remove one component of uncertainty in the process of economic integration and ensure that transactions can be taken in a reliable manner.  If employed effectively, removing uncertainty can reinforce the overall stability of the government by ensuring the integrity of government officials. 
  
### National Sovereignty and Government Legitimacy 
The statements by Gen Ayub that Hakim Khan’s people were living illegally on government land was a reflection of the weak governance of Helmand province in 2010, and the rigid nature of the official land law of the Afghan government.  The inability of the state to control the land and how it was being used, and to reflect the reality faced by the people, was the result of the long period of war that Afghanistan has known, and the fact that hungry people will seek resources to feed their families.  The social contract between the state and the people was not reflected in the reality on the ground.

The ability of the state to effectively govern is limited by many factors, security is only the most obvious.  In southern Afghanistan many of the functions that should have been well defined as part of national authority were still largely driven by personal relationships, and encompassed many factors, including tribe and key personalities. Over the last 40+ years many Afghan government officials sought to profit from their role in the government, either through bribes to perform official duties or by selectively enforcing regulations in line with personal agendas.<a title="Koran, Kalashnikov, and the Laptop." href="https://github.com/Cameron-Grams/Glass-Shield/blob/master/Part_4/Footnotes/Footnotes.md"><sup>13</sup></a>  In 2015 Transparency International rated Afghanistan 166 out of 168 countries examined for perception of public corruption.<a title="Afghanistan Country Rating. Transparency International " href="https://github.com/Cameron-Grams/Glass-Shield/blob/master/Part_4/Footnotes/Footnotes.md"><sup>14</sup></a>  Predatory governance by local officials has provided a major impetus to continue the insurgency and drive Afghan citizens to seek a more reliable authority to organize their lives.  The lack of government integrity is a contributing factor to the continued instability; citizens are inclined to seek justice and protection where they feel it can be provided most reliably, and that is not always from the recognized government authorities.  Formal law can work against the legitimacy of the state if it is too rigid to accommodate reality; the USIP report stated that the land law established by the Taliban was more responsive to informal land claims and more responsive in adjudicating conflicting claims.<a title="Land Conflict in Afghanistan. USIP Special Report 372 (2015)" href="https://github.com/Cameron-Grams/Glass-Shield/blob/master/Part_4/Footnotes/Footnotes.md"><sup>15</sup></a>

Afghanistan’s international legitimacy has also suffered due to the inability or unwillingness of government officials to control the use of land for opium production.  The tradition of opium production and the economic relationships established surrounding it are a feature of many of the weakly governed parts of Afghanistan.  This has undermined Afghanistan’s place in the larger world economy.

Effective record keeping is a tool for governance; without a solid record of who has rights to the land there is no way for the government to protect those people and no way to ensure that the people contribute fairly to the maintenance of the state in a lawful manner.  Developing effective records of land-ownership not only benefits the people working the land by providing an element of security in their lives, but enables the state to assert sovereignty by claiming taxes on the productive use of the land.  Legitimate taxation should be an objective fact and not an arbitrary levy imposed locally.  Effective record keeping ensures that this transaction between the state and the people is conducted in a just and transparent manner.  This paper examines the possibility of bringing the distributed ledger capability of the blockchain technology to Afghanistan in order to provide stability by delivering transparency and integrity in the record keeping process of land ownership.


## 3. Premise
This paper seeks to examine a potential set of tools that can be employed to reinforce stability, specifically the potential role in post conflict areas where trust is lacking.  The assumption is that there have already been steps taken to reconcile adversaries and an initial framework for governance is taking shape or already established.  There is a critical minimum level of buy-in required by former adversaries; a strong argument can be made that the current round of conflict in Afghanistan has persisted as long as it has because the members of the former Taliban government were not allowed representation during the drafting of the 2004 Afghan Constitution.<a title="Afghanistan's Flawed Constitutional Process. International Crisis Group 56 (2003) " href="https://github.com/Cameron-Grams/Glass-Shield/blob/master/Part_4/Footnotes/Footnotes.md"><sup>16</sup></a>  That lack of participation undermined their willingness to negotiate.  The fact that their acceptance of that constitution has been a precondition for negotiations from the US created a further obstacle.<a title="Talking with the Taliban. USIP 356 (Jan 2015)" href="https://github.com/Cameron-Grams/Glass-Shield/blob/master/Part_4/Footnotes/Footnotes.md"><sup>17</sup></a>  This paper assumes that the obstacle of non-participation has been cleared and seeks to outline a tool that will ensure continued endorsement of government institutions.  This level of buy-in would not be required throughout the entire county to make a pilot blockchain project a viable option, only local stability and buy-in would be necessary.  With time, ideally, the utility of the system would become apparent as stronger records facilitated greater economic activity and greater stability.  However some measure of initial stability is required to start.

The goal here is also less ambitious than those of some visionaries working with the blockchain who see the potential to cede a great deal of human decision making to precise algorithms.  Here the focus will be on how the distributed ledger technology of the blockchain can support institutions by providing assured transactions, transparency and accountability over the performance of administrative functions.  This model will seek to outline ways that this technology can reinforce the role of government and the implications for citizens.

One component of any political reconciliation has to be an acknowledgement that the post conflict time period starts as Year Zero for property ownership.  In Afghanistan in 2010 I met many elders who had documents from multiple authorities that established property rights over their land, from the post-Soviet regime of Najibullah, to the Taliban, to the Karzai administration there were multiple legitimate claims to land.  Significantly, all of these documents had been issued after 1978.  Afghanistan is an extreme example since it has had 40 years of near continuous conflict.  During that time different central and regional authorities were able to assert control over a given area and publish acknowledgement of resource rights accordingly.  In order to move forward there has to be a recognition that the past is past and everyone is working towards the future from a single starting point, and an acceptance that people who have been occupying government land have some rights based on their current activity. A default to conditions in 1978 impedes the goal of moving forward because it denies Afghanistan’s recent history.

At present the Afghan land law has provisions for citizens who occupy and improve government land under a policy of “adverse possession”.<a title="Land Conflict in Afghanistan. USIP Special Report 372 (2015) " href="https://github.com/Cameron-Grams/Glass-Shield/blob/master/Part_4/Footnotes/Footnotes.md"><sup>18</sup></a> However this law states that citizens must have occupied the land for 35 years.  This is an unrealistic amount of time given that most of the past 40 years has seen war in Afghanistan.  There has to be an official acceptance of present conditions rather than using those from 1978 as the basis of law.

Establishing a Year Zero for property rights sets a clean slate moving forward.  It also has the potential effect of disenfranchising those not engaged in the reconciliation process; dispute resolution has to be acknowledged as part of the governance process.  The rights of refugees and the claims of willful ex-patriots both must be scrutinized as part of the process of establishing a Year Zero baseline.  It is essential that these issues are recognized as part of the reconciliation process and incorporated in governance from the beginning.

The blockchain distributed ledger technology can facilitate the process of reconciling government records with reality by providing transparency, security, and accountability over the administrative and economic status of property.  This process is still subject to all of the pressures of any region where the rule of law is contested.  The goal should be to bring the land into a productive capacity for the benefit of the people.  If security concerns can be abated the land should be used in a manner most conducive to the welfare of the people in the region. 

[Continue to Part 2]( https://github.com/Cameron-Grams/Glass-Shield/blob/master/Part_2/Part_2.md ) 