## 4. The Technology of the Blockchain1
Transparency and integrity of information are the most essential aspects of blockchain technology.  Development of this technology can be credited to the initial work with Bitcoin.  Bitcoin is the most widely recognized implementation of blockchain technology because it was the first, but Bitcoin has since been followed by other implementations that are further driving what is possible.  In 2008 the Bitcoin whitepaper that described this technology was published by Satoshi Nakamoto on a cryptography mailing list.2  The initial whitepaper explained the concept of a distributed blockchain.3  Shortly after explaining the technology the software to perform the calculations was released and the community of cryptographers began experimenting with “mining Bitcoin”, or growing the blockchain as described in the paper.  Blockchain technology began as a niche practice among cryptographers and technologists but has grown into something truly unique.  
One of the unique applications of the blockchain is the “distributed ledger” feature of the technology.  The United Kingdom’s Government Office for Science released an assessment of the potential for blockchain implementation of a distributed ledger in January 2016.4 They provided a succinct definition: “A block chain is a type of database that takes a number of records and puts them in a block (rather like collating them onto a single sheet of paper). Each block is then ‘chained’ to the next block, using a cryptographic signature. This allows block chains to be used like a ledger, which can be shared and corroborated by anyone with the appropriate permissions.”5 The fact that the chain grows in a cryptographically secure manner ensures the integrity of the entries made in these successive blocks. 
A blockchain is a record of calculations based on the state of the network at successive points in time.  Each record, the block, is calculated based on the block that precedes it by reading the header information of the block (like a label or title) and the transactions or other information for that time period.  These calculations are performed by computers linked on the network each trying combinations of values to solve the current problem represented by the state of the network.  These calculations are largely trial and error so the speed of computing power that achieves these calculations drives the evolution of the blockchain.6  Once a given set of calculations is recognized it is confirmed by the other members of the network.  This ensures that there is a consensus on the state of the information in the blockchain.  Confirming the block is a matter of more straight-forward calculation and does not require the computing power needed for the trial and error of initially solving the block. 
All of the blocks are visible and able to be authenticated by all of the participants in the network. This is how blockchains provide transparency and integrity for information.  The network recognizes the longest version of the chain that reflects the most recent calculations and continues building from there.  This provides all of the participants in the network visibility into the overall state of the network and an assurance in the soundness of the entries in the actual blocks.  
The calculations that produce the actual blocks are hard cryptographic problems that require a great deal of computational power to accomplish the trial and error of possible solutions.  This requires a great deal of hardware and electrical power.  Completing these calculations is rewarded with tokens, proof of work, for performing these calculations by the network, growing the blockchain provides a greater investment in the blockchain; Bitcoins are the tokens in the case of the Bitcoin network, Ether (Eth) in the case of the Ethereum network, or some other incentive mechanism defined by a local network on another blockchain. 
The original implementation of a blockchain with Bitcoin only sought to provide a record of ownership of the proof of work tokens in the Bitcoin system; the individual blocks of information captured between calculations was designed to reflect transfers of ownership of the tokens. What is possible with a blockchain system has evolved to the point where the value of the information entered into  the blocks is now the object of focus. This is the concept of a distributed ledger that will be considered in this paper. 
The original Bitcoin system allows all participants able to make entries and engage in token exchange freely.  Subsequent systems have defined roles and established restrictions on the capabilities of network participants.  This has expanded the potential use of the blockchain; it is possible to provide all network participants full visibility of the entries, but restrict who can make successive entries, or require multiple entries to validate an action.  This has the greatest potential as a tool for governance, where administrative accountability is provided through transparency and permissioned entries are defined in accordance with roles in the government.   

Security of the system 
The blockchain has evolved in the open source software development community.  The technology involved and the practice of growing the blockchain have been publicly available, discussed and examined by the community of experts best qualified to ensure it’s integrity.  Andreas Antonopoulos, one of the more prominent blockchain innovators, likened blockchain to the “sewer-rat”, since it’s immune system has been exposed to continuous assaults it has developed a high degree of resilience.7  
The greatest source of that resilience is the network effects achieved by having many participants in the system; by having a large number of people performing the calculations that grow the network there is greater assurance in the system’s integrity based on the consensus of the large number of network participants.  No one is able to change a previous entry without alerting the entire network and consensus is required for new entries to be recognized by the network.  
There are theoretical threats to the information in the blockchain; if a single participant captured more than 51% of the computing power of the network it would theoretically be possible to control the entries that were made in the network by establishing a single source of authority, rather than network consensus.  This would enable that actor to control future entries, but they would still not be able to alter the past record.  This threat is mathematically possible but the amount of computing power being employed from the large number of sites makes this threat less likely.  Blockchain networks benefit from the network effects of large numbers of users; more users ensure more efforts at computation and more locations of the past record.  

Ethereum
The Ethereum blockchain is an evolution of the blockchain concept first employed by Bitcoin.  Originally proposed by Vitalik Buterin8 in 2014 the Ethereum system expands on the original concept of the blockchain employed by Bitcoin by embedding a complete scripting language in the blockchain itself, so that individual blocks can contain additional information.9  This enables the ledger to capture information complete with instructions for actions to be taken at a later time, or when given conditions are met.  This enables entirely new forms of social organization and economic activity, such as the Distributed Autonomous Organization (DAO) and Smart Contracts.  The DAO is a collection of users who have pooled value in the form of Eth tokens and make collective, decentralized investment decisions.10  Smart Contracts are the conditions based instructions encoded in the actual blockchain itself, for example: transfer X to Y if conditions A, B and C take place.  The transfer would take place only if conditions are met and without further human interaction. 
This further expansion of what is possible with the blockchain is very new and still has significant pitfalls associated with implementation.  In June 2016 a malicious actor created a Smart Contract with the DAO that caused him to be repeatedly paid without termination.  This led to the DAO being effectively robbed of the Eth tokens from the network that had a value of $50 million at the time.11  These tokens were never converted to conventional currency or removed from the Ethereum network; it was possible to identify exactly where the misappropriated funds had been placed, they were just no longer able to be accessed by the rightful, previous owners. 
The theft of these tokens presented the network development team with a significant test; although the tokens were taken against the will of the previous owners, the Ethereum blockchain system had performed exactly as it was designed.  The fault or cause of the incident was that the DAO had accepted a Smart Contract with a script that took more than they realized it would.
The incident provided a challenging test for the governance of the Ethereum community; many embraced blockchain technology out of a Libertarian ethos that eschewed central authority, they felt that the incident should be allowed to proceed and serve as a lesson to other members of the community.  Others felt that the Ethereum community should collectively go back in time to the point on the blockchain before the script became active so that the tokens never left the DAO account.  This is possible by establishing that the blockchain will proceed from the block that was previous to when the theft occurred; the process is called “forking” and is a matter of changing the orientation of network participants.  In the end there was a split between these two views; the blockchain that included the theft proceeded as “Ethereum Classic” and another chain forked, or established it’s new record from the point before the incident.  The difference between the two blockchains is now a matter of where the tokens are located.  Both have been proceeding since the fork took place.12

Implications for Use
The virtue of the blockchain is that it provides a mechanism to establish trust in an objective, transparent, and secure manner by creating a cryptographically secure record of activity.  The incident with the DAO was resolved in a very public manner that reinforced the consensus of the community, with those who disagreed for ideological reasons moving in a different direction.  But the incident does highlight the danger of automating too many functions that are deemed critical.  The technology is still evolving and will be from here on out.  There just has to be an acknowledgement of the risk involved with trusting the technology without human supervision of critical processes.  The potential uses of the Smart Contracts are limited only by the imagination; everything from drought insurance, crop provenance (where goods are tracked from field to consumer), to futures contracts or investment funding are being developed with the blockchain technology.  Participants just have to be cognizant of the risks.  
Due to these risks, applications in Governance should retain human supervision and rely on the more tested features of the blockchain for the time being; the technology can reinforce the role played by officials by compelling integrity in their actions without ceding governance to full automation.  The more stable functions are the features of the blockchain that provide a record embedded in the blockchain itself, the distributed ledger.  The entries in the blocks that compose this ledger can be scripted in a way that reinforces the roles of those involved in governance, by enabling specific roles and permissions for activity (this will be discussed further in Section 6, the Afghan Model).  This provides both an immutable record and supervision of those performing these actions in the government.  This sort of guarantee can be the basis of trust when all involved understand the process.  There is unquestionably an education requirement involved, but there is also a growing body of precedent for this application.     

5. Current Perspectives on Implementation
In 2016 there have been several notable studies and projects that explore the use of distributed ledger technology, the uses of tokens as cryptocurrency, and the blockchain in general.  The purpose of this paper is to examine how the blockchain technology can be leveraged as a potential trust-building mechanism in areas of weak governance.  With that in mind the following studies and efforts that will be discussed. 

United Nations and the International Monetary Fund
In 2016 both the United Nations (United Nations Research Institute of Social Development, UNRISD) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) completed studies on blockchain technology.13,14   Both studies focused on the use the blockchain to produce cryptocurrencies from the blockchain tokens and the potential role and impact of these units of exchange not backed by a national government.  
The UNRISD study focused on the use of Bitcoin as a potential mechanism for “social solidarity-based finance”.  The IMF study was more concerned with the implications for governance and taxation.  Each study did address the distributed ledger provided by the blockchain but that aspect of the technology was not the focus of these studies. 
One significant contribution from the UNRISD report was the definition of terms such as “techno-evangelism” and “solutionism” as emanating from the circles of technology developers, where they are proponents for the potential of blockchain technology and envision a variety of social changes with it’s implementation.  The social aspects of new technology and the impacts on existing institutions and stakeholders within society is not a trivial issue. The study identified this fact but did not explore it fully due to the high level scope of the report.  The study discussed Hernando de Soto’s work and the potential to provide an incontrovertible mechanism for trust among a population.   
Another significant point raised by these reports is the role of trust and network effects.  In many historical settings the authority of a nation (in the case of currency) or an accredited intermediary (in the case of lawyers or notaries) has been necessary for two parties to establish trust in their interactions.  The strong cryptography of the blockchain algorithm and the open nature of the distributed ledger have the potential to expand the scope of interactions where trust is required.  The network effects achieved by expanding the number of people or sites involved in these sorts of interactions, and how this increases the overall value of the network as a whole, was also discussed. This transparency and belief in the integrity of the record is the aspect of blockchain technology that has the greatest potential for improved governance.   

The Government of Sweden’s Lantmateriet
In July of 2016 the private companies of Telia, ChromaWay, and Kairos Future released a report for the Swedish Mapping, cadastre and land registry authority on the potential use of blockchain technology in land registration.15  The focus of this report was the process of land sales in Sweden and the prospects for making the process more efficient with the use of distributed ledger technology enabling all parties to share information more rapidly.  The report is the first stage of a larger project for the Government of Sweden, the second stage is an actual proof of concept demonstration that facilitates the process of land registration using a local blockchain.  

The Government of Georgia
In April 2016 the Government of Georgia’s National Agency of Public Registry announced a partnership with the company BitFury and Hernando de Soto’s Institute for Liberty and Democracy devoted towards providing land registration using the blockchain.16  The Georgian government stated that their goal was to provide reliable transparency over the administrative actions of the state in order to eliminate corruption.17

The Government of Estonia
Estonia is the most advanced country in terms of moving the interaction between citizens and the government into the digital domain.  Estonia has developed a system of governance where citizens can accomplish nearly all of their government related tasks online; from voting, to registering a vehicle, changing a residence or accessing their health care information from anywhere in the country.  The country provides an excellent example of what is possible.  
Estonia accomplished this integrated system by issuing all of it’s citizens an identification card that has two stage strong encryption and enables them to reliably access, and more importantly protect, their personal information.  Culturally the Estonian attitude of trusting the government with such a concentrated amount of personal information is probably unique to Estonia.  It is hard to imagine something that pervasive being accepted in the United States, let alone a country like Afghanistan where violent resistance to the government is still the reality in many parts of the country.  But Afghanistan, and the United States, should look at what has been possible and realize that tailoring these capabilities to local conditions will result in optimized outcomes for the future. 
The services provided by the Estonian government reside in 900 databases.18  The key to the Estonian approach has been to establish standards centrally and allow integration to be performed in a decentralized manner by the offices that are responsible for those databases.  One key component of this distributed database system is the Keyless Signature Infrastructure developed by the Government of Estonia in partnership with the Estonian company GuardTime.19,20 This system employs a blockchain as a component of data integration, ensuring that citizens are able to access a uniform baseline of certain information and that that information is stored in a manner that is uniformly replicated and secure.
Compared to having a central government responsible for a single database this has resulted in a significant cost savings; 2015 estimates for Estonia’s costs were between 50-60 million Euros, compared to Russia’s efforts at e-government that ran an estimated 90 million Euros or those of Kazakhstan which cost 150 million Euros.21   Estonia has several distinct advantages that enabled them to produce such a robust system relatively cheaply, the most significant being a small population size with no legacy infrastructure or administration that had to be accommodated.  But that said they serve as the best example of what is possible between a government and the people in the digital age.  

The Government of Ghana
Possibly the best example of what is possible for Afghanistan are the efforts at land registration on a blockchain by the Government of Ghana.  In a partnership between the national government,  a non-governmental organization named Bitland, and the Crypto Currency Exchange Denmark (CCEDK), a project for land registration using blockchain technology was started this year.22  Rural Ghana also struggles with a history of predatory local governance, poor documentation of existing land ownership and unreliable infrastructure.  Tribal dynamics also play a part of people’s lives and impact the realities of land ownership.  These are similar features found in Afghanistan worth noting. 
The Bitland Ghana land registration project is based on the OpenLedger23 blockchain.24  The ability to use this system has to overcome local challenges, such as public acceptance and local infrastructure.  This has been the focus of the NGO, Bitland, where they plan to establish local centers with solar power, wifi, and a staff trained to educate local landowners on the details of the system.25  Currently they have one center operational in Ghana, and another in Mauritius26. This sort of bottom-up approach is the only realistic path to success in areas of weak governance.  
The final intent of the project is to enable local landowners to access a system of micro-credit based on their equity in their landholdings, precisely as described by Hernando de Soto.  The economics of this is definitely a work in progress, but involves a blockchain specific token (called Cadastrals in this case) tied to the actual land.  This currency will facilitate the interaction between registration and the conventional economies of fiat currency.  

Summary of current projects and looking ahead
2016 has seen a variety of projects that attempt to utilize the distributed ledger features of the blockchain in an effort to provide transparency and integrity for government services to the people.  It is notable that these projects are based on a variety of public-private partnerships that match technical competence with the legal authorities of the sovereign state.  Different blockchains have been used, from the OpenLedger, to Bitcoin, to private proprietary blockchains provided just for the government in question.  The variety of efforts highlights the flexibility of this technology.  Time will tell which of these efforts proves most effective.  
Personal identity as legal fact is a component  of any notion of ownership.  In May there was an announcement that several blockchain providers will be working in partnership with the UN towards the goal of establishing a system of universal identity through the ID2020 program.27  The goal is to universally provide the protections that are possible when individuals can be identified and claim their rights.  The driving impetus for this program was to fight human trafficking and slavery, but there are considerable implications for governance in many areas that will be derived from a stronger definition of the individual in relation to the state and larger world.  This program could support and facilitate blockchain land registration in Afghanistan by ensuring the identity of Afghan citizens and thereby their relation to the state and their property.  
